# Introduction to Environmental Data Science

## Course rationale

Our aim is to develop a data science “on-ramp” course targeted at the environmental science community on campus.  Specifically, we envision this course will draw students from many of the units within the College of the Environment (e.g., Aquatic and Fishery Sciences, Earth and Space Sciences, Environmental and Forest Sciences, Quantitative Ecology and Resource Management Program, Program on the Environment, Friday Harbor labs, School of Marine Affairs, and Oceanography), as well as units outside the College including Biology and Built Environments.  Our proposed course will use the R statistical computing language and the ecosystem of modern tools used by data scientists, including the tidyverse, R Markdown, and GitHub.

R is by far the dominant programming language within the environmental science community and basic proficiency in the language is now considered standard for the discipline. As such, our environmental scientists need welcoming entryways to learn these tools.  While there are some courses on campus specific to teaching R (e.g., FISH 552, 553, 554), we do not know of any that are specifically linked to the data science minor or the eScience Institute, or any that focus on open science and data practices through a social and ethical lens. Thus, part of the hope for this course is to better integrate the large R user community on campus with the open data science community. Similarly, we see this course as a pathway for environmental science students to gain exposure to the data science world. Lastly, our course is also strategically aligned with the new Future Rivers graduate research training program, which is partnered with the eScience Institute and includes a data science element. 